Transaction and transaction management in SQL (#2813)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: content/articles/transaction-management-in-database/index.md.md

---
layout: engineering-education
status: publish
published: true
url: /transaction-management-in database/
title: Transaction management in database
description: 
author: paul-mwangi
date: 2021-07-08T00:00:00-07:41
topics: []
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
images:

  - url: /engineering-education/transaction-management-in database/hero.jpg
    alt: Transaction management in database
---
### Introduction
A transaction is a logical unit of work performed on a database. They are logically ordered units of work completed by the end-user or an application. A transaction is made up of one or more database modifications. Creating, updating, or deleting a record from a table, for example. To preserve data integrity and address database issues, it's critical to keep track of these transactions. We can bundle SQL queries together and run them as a single transaction

> ### Prerequisities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Prerequisites
```

> Before learning this tutorial you need to have basics in SQL(structured query language) and understand how to create a database which we will be working from and performing our transactions against.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To follow through with this tutorial you need to know basic SQL(structured query language) and understand how to create a database.
```

### Transaction states 
There are various database transaction states as follows.
1. Active state- this is the state in which a transaction execution process begins. Operations such as read or write are performed on the database.
2. Partially committed- means that a transaction is only partially committed once it has been completed.

> 3. Committed stage- After a transaction execution is completed successfully the transaction is in committed state.All changes made to the database are permanently documented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Committed stage- After a transaction execution is completed successfully the transaction is in a committed state. All changes made to the database are permanently documented.
```

Here is the program to create a table;
```SQL
CREATE DATABASE MEGA COLLEGE;
CREATE TABLE STUDENTS(Id integer PRIMARY KEY, Name text, Regno varchar, Course text, Fees integer);

INSERT INTO STUDENTS VALUES(1,'John', 'V20/680', 'Education', 40000);
INSERT INTO STUDENTS VALUES(2,'Ahmed', 'G4/270', 'Computer Science',50000);
INSERT INTO STUDENTS VALUES(3,'Ian', 'A43/476', 'Engineering', 62500);
INSERT INTO STUDENTS VALUES(4,'Jane', 'A19/520', 'IT', 41200);
INSERT INTO STUDENTS VALUES(5,'Robert','P62/491', 'Nursing',43700);
INSERT INTO STUDENTS VALUES(6,'Hellen', 'V20/470', 'Education', 22000);
INSERT INTO STUDENTS VALUES(7,'Joan','P62/801', 'Nursing',18000);
COMMIT;

SELECT * FROM STUDENTS;
```
Below is the output of the program.

|ID | NAME   | REG NO  | COURSE     | FEES  |
|-- | :-----:| :------:| :---------:| -----:|
|1  | JOHN   |V20/630|Education|40000|
|2  | AHMED  |G4/270|Computer science|50000|
|3  | IAN    |A43/476|Engineering|62500|
|4  | JANE|A19/520|IT|41200|
|5  | ROBERT |P62/491|Nursing|43700|
|6  | HELLEN |V20/470|Education|22000|
|7  | JOAN   |P62/801|Nursing|18000|

### Transactional control commands

> The Data Manipulation Language (DML) instructions are utilized with the transactional commands such as INSERT, UPDATE, and DELETE. These commands cannot be used with the Data Definition Language because they are automatically committed to the database. Below are the transaction commands; 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Data Manipulation Language (DML) instructions are utilized with transactional commands such as INSERT, UPDATE, and DELETE. These commands cannot be used with the Data Definition Language because they are automatically committed to the database. Below are the transaction commands; 
```

1. COMMIT- Saves the changes done against the database.

> 2. ROLLBACK- Redoes the changes done before being commited to the database.
> 3. SAVEPOINT-saves a point in a transaction on which to carry out a rollback.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. ROLLBACK- Redoes the changes done before being committed to the database.
3. SAVEPOINT- saves a point in a transaction on which to carry out a rollback.
```

4. SET TRANSACTION- Gives a name to a transaction.

### COMMIT command
The COMMIT command saves changes made to a database as part of a transaction. The COMMIT command preserves all database transactions since the previous COMMIT or ROLLBACK command.
The syntax of the COMMIT command; 

```SQL
COMMIT
```
We can delete the records from the table that have fees=40000 and commit the changes in the database.

```SQL
DELETE FROM STUDENTS
WHERE FEES = 40000;
COMMIT;

> ```

Reviewer: I'm using  PostgreSQL and when I run this I get a warning that says there is no transaction in progress.

```bash
mega=#  SELECT * FROM STUDENTS;
 id |  name  |  regno  |      course      | fees
----+--------+---------+------------------+-------
  1 | John   | V20/680 | Education        | 40000
  2 | Ahmed  | G4/270  | Computer Science | 50000
  3 | Ian    | A43/476 | Engineering      | 62500
  4 | Jane   | A19/520 | IT               | 41200
  5 | Robert | P62/491 | Nursing          | 43700
  6 | Hellen | V20/470 | Education        | 22000
  7 | Joan   | P62/801 | Nursing          | 18000
(7 rows)

mega=# DELETE FROM STUDENTS
mega-# WHERE FEES = 40000;
DELETE 1
mega=# COMMIT;
WARNING:  there is no transaction in progress
COMMIT
```

This command will delete the row from the table which has fees equal to 40000 and save the changes to the database.
When this command is executed the results are as follows;

Output;
|ID | NAME   | REG NO  | COURSE     | FEES  |
|-- | :-----:| :------:| :---------:| -----:|
|2  | AHMED  |G4/270|Computer science|50000|
|3  | IAN    |A43/476|Engineering|62500|
|4  | JANE|A19/520|IT|41200|
|5  | ROBERT |P62/491|Nursing|43700|
|6  | HELLEN |V20/470|Education|22000|
|7  | JOAN   |P62/801|Nursing|18000|

The first row is deleted and the results saved.

### ROLLBACK command
The ROLLBACK command can only be used to undo transactions from the last ROLLBACK or COMMIT command issued.
The ROLLBACK command syntax is as follows;

```SQL
ROLLBACK;
```

Consider deleting a record from the table where fees =40000 and ROLLBACK the changes;

```SQL
DELETE FROM STUDENTS
WHERE FEES = 40000;

> ROLLBACK;

Reviewer: Running this does not result in the output you say it will on my end. 
It also raises the same `there is no transaction in progress` warning
```bash
mega=# SELECT * FROM STUDENTS;
 id |  name  |  regno  |      course      | fees
----+--------+---------+------------------+-------
  1 | John   | V20/680 | Education        | 40000
  2 | Ahmed  | G4/270  | Computer Science | 50000
  3 | Ian    | A43/476 | Engineering      | 62500
  4 | Jane   | A19/520 | IT               | 41200
  5 | Robert | P62/491 | Nursing          | 43700
  6 | Hellen | V20/470 | Education        | 22000
  7 | Joan   | P62/801 | Nursing          | 18000
(7 rows)

mega=# DELETE FROM STUDENTS
mega-# WHERE FEES = 40000;
DELETE 1
mega=# ROLLBACK;
WARNING:  there is no transaction in progress
ROLLBACK
mega=# SELECT * FROM STUDENTS;
 id |  name  |  regno  |      course      | fees
----+--------+---------+------------------+-------
  2 | Ahmed  | G4/270  | Computer Science | 50000
  3 | Ian    | A43/476 | Engineering      | 62500
  4 | Jane   | A19/520 | IT               | 41200
  5 | Robert | P62/491 | Nursing          | 43700
  6 | Hellen | V20/470 | Education        | 22000
  7 | Joan   | P62/801 | Nursing          | 18000
(6 rows)
```

|1  | JOHN   |V20/630|Education|40000|
|2  | AHMED  |G4/270|Computer science|50000|
|3  | IAN    |A43/476|Engineering|62500|
|4  | JANE|A19/520|IT|41200|
|5  | ROBERT |P62/491|Nursing|43700|
|6  | HELLEN |V20/470|Education|22000|
|7  | JOAN   |P62/801|Nursing|18000|
The delete operation would not change the records of the database therefore the results would be the same and the database remains unchanged.

### SAVEPOINT command
This command rolls back a transaction to a point in the database without having to roll back the entire transaction.
The SAVEPOINT command syntax;

```SQL
SAVEPOINT SAVEPOINT_NAME;
```

Unlike the ROLLBACK command, which reverses a set of transactions, the SAVEPOINT command just creates a SAVEPOINT among all transaction statements.
Rolling back to a SAVEPOINT;

```SQL
ROLLBACK TO SAVEPOINT_NAME;
```

We can delete three records from the STUDENTS table. We create a SAVEPOINT before each delete, this enables us to ROLLBACK to any SAVEPOINT any time to get back to the original state of the record.

```SQL
SAVEPOINT SP1;

DELETE FROM STUDENTS WHERE ID = 1;

SAVEPOINT SP2;

DELETE FROM STUDENTS WHERE ID= 2;

SAVEPOINT SP3;

DELETE FROM STUDENTS WHERE ID= 3;
```

> Executing the savepoint command we have the results as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Executing the savepoint command we have the results as:

```

Output;
|ID | NAME   | REG NO  | COURSE     | FEES  |
|-- | :-----:| :------:| :---------:| -----:|
|2  | AHMED  |G4/270|Computer science|50000|
|3  | IAN    |A43/476|Engineering|62500|
|4  | JANE|A19/520|IT|41200|
|5  | ROBERT |P62/491|Nursing|43700|
|6  | HELLEN |V20/470|Education|22000|
|7  | JOAN   |P62/801|Nursing|18000|

The first row is deleted and the results saved.

### ROLLBACK command
The ROLLBACK command can only be used to undo transactions from the last ROLLBACK or COMMIT command issued.
The ROLLBACK command syntax is as follows;

```SQL
BEGIN TRANSACTION;
ROLLBACK;
```

Consider deleting a record from the table where fees =40000 and ROLLBACK the changes;

```SQL
BEGIN TRANSACTION;
DELETE FROM STUDENTS
WHERE FEES = 40000;
ROLLBACK;
```

Executing the rollback command the results are as follows;
Output:
|ID | NAME   | REG NO  | COURSE     | FEES  |
|-- | :-----:| :------:| :---------:| -----:|
|1  | JOHN   |V20/630|Education|40000|
|2  | AHMED  |G4/270|Computer science|50000|
|3  | IAN    |A43/476|Engineering|62500|
|4  | JANE|A19/520|IT|41200|
|5  | ROBERT |P62/491|Nursing|43700|
|6  | HELLEN |V20/470|Education|22000|
|7  | JOAN   |P62/801|Nursing|18000|

> The delete operation would not change the records of the database therefore the results would be the same and the database remains unchanged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The delete operation would not change the records of the database therefore the results would be the same and the database remains unchanged.
```

The SAVEPOINT command syntax;

```SQL
BEGIN TRANSACTION;
SAVEPOINT SAVEPOINT_NAME;
```

Unlike the ROLLBACK command, which reverses a set of transactions, the SAVEPOINT command just creates a SAVEPOINT among all transaction statements.
Rolling back to a SAVEPOINT;

```SQL
BEGIN TRANSACTION;
ROLLBACK TO SAVEPOINT_NAME;
```

We can delete three records from the STUDENTS table. We create a SAVEPOINT before each delete, this enables us to ROLLBACK to any SAVEPOINT any time to get back to the original state of the record.

```SQL
BEGIN TRANSACTION;
SAVEPOINT SP1;

DELETE FROM STUDENTS WHERE ID = 1;

SAVEPOINT SP2;

DELETE FROM STUDENTS WHERE ID= 2;

SAVEPOINT SP3;

DELETE FROM STUDENTS WHERE ID= 3;
```

Executing the savepoint command we have the results as:
Output:
|ID | NAME   | REG NO  | COURSE     | FEES  |
|-- | :-----:| :------:| :---------:| -----:|
|4  | JANE|A19/520|IT|41200|
|5  | ROBERT |P62/491|Nursing|43700|
|6  | HELLEN |V20/470|Education|22000|
|7  | JOAN   |P62/801|Nursing|18000|

We have deleted from the table where id 1,2 and 3 exist but with savepoints SP1, SP2 and  SP3 respectively. We can now rollback to any point using the savepoints.

```SQL

> BEGIN TRANSACTION;

Reviewer: this `BEGIN` statement is misplaced. Consider removing it altogether. 
```bash
WARNING:  there is already a transaction in progress
```

```suggestion
```
